docs: RFC-102 - Spark Vector Search in Apache Hudi (#14218)
apache/hudi: rfc/rfc-102/rfc-102.md

```
    // Vector search with WHERE clause filtering
      val result = spark.sql(
        s"""
           |SELECT id, name, price, category, _distance
           |FROM hudi_vector_search(
           |  'products',
           |  'embedding',
           |  ARRAY(1.0, 2.0, 3.0),
           |  10
           |)
           |WHERE category = 'electronics' AND price < 100
           |ORDER BY _distance
           |""".stripMargin
      ).collect()
```

```
  // Vector search with JOIN
      val result = spark.sql(
        s"""
           |SELECT vs.id, vs.name, c.category_name, vs._distance
           |FROM hudi_vector_search(
           |  'products',
           |  'embedding',
           |  ARRAY(1.5, 2.5),
           |  3
           |) vs
           |JOIN $categoriesTable c ON vs.category_id = c.category_id
           |ORDER BY vs._distance
           |""".stripMargin
      ).collect()

```

## Batch of query embeddings search
Say we have two tables that have their own vector embeddings columns(these columns share some semantic meaning with one another). The user should be able to compare the embeddings from tableA against the embeddings of tableB.

> For each element in tableA, we can return back the nearest closest k elements from tableB.

Reviewer: For the batch (table-vs-table) search, have you considered the computational cost? If table A has N rows and table B has M rows, a brute-force approach is O(N × M × d). For two large tables this could be extremely expensive. It might be worth discussing practical size limits or whether this mode requires at least one side to be small enough to broadcast.

3. As the executor iterates through its slice of the data, it calculates the distance to q. If the calculated distance is smaller than the current maximum distance in the heap (the k-th neighbor), the new vector replaces the previous k-th neighbor, and the heap is re-balanced. This ensures that the memory overhead on the executor remains constant regardless of the partition size, as only k candidates are stored.

4. Once all executors complete their local scans, they transmit their local top-k heaps back to the coordinator. The driver is then tasked with a final global merge. If the cluster consists of m nodes, the coordinator receives m×k candidate vectors. The coordinator merges these sets into a final global top-k list.

## How can we improve brute force KNN to perform optimally within Spark/Hudi?

The main question then becomes are the tricks we can do to parallelize this work as efficiently as possible, such as having each worker node(executor) take a N rows from the hudi table and perform the distance calculation on that file group.
We also want to make sure before we run the above that we do the following:

> * Ensure spark column projection of just the vector column provided by the user in the SQL instead of reading all columns from the table

Reviewer: The section on distributing work across file groups is interesting but light on detail. How does the TVF actually integrate with Hudi's read path? Will it go through `HoodieSparkSqlReader` or implement a custom `DataSourceV2` relation? Understanding the integration point matters for things like time-travel queries, incremental reads, and metadata-table interaction.

<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements. See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# RFC-102: Vector Search in Apache Hudi

## Proposers

- @rahil-c

## Approvers

- @suryaprasanna
- @vinothchandar
- @balaji-varadarajan-ai
- @yihua

## Abstract

This RFC proposes adding the ability to perform a native **vector similarity search** on Hudi tables.

> Building on RFC-100 (unstructured data storage in Hudi), Hudi tables would contain unstructured content (e.g., images, video, documents) as well as the related *embeddings* for those contents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building on RFC-100 (unstructured data storage in Hudi), Hudi tables would contain unstructured data columns (e.g., images, video, documents) and the traditional structured data columns, along with columns that store well as the related *embeddings* for those contents.
```

The next natural requirement for AI/ML workloads on Hudi is to **search these embeddings efficiently**:

- Given a query embedding (e.g., derived from an image, text, or audio snippet),
- Find the *k* most similar rows in a Hudi table,
- Return those rows along with a similarity score.

This RFC focuses on:

> 

Reviewer: The RFC doesn't discuss alternatives considered. For instance, why build vector search as a Hudi-native TVF rather than leveraging existing Spark ML vector operations or external vector search libraries? What about delegating to Lance's native ANN search for tables using Lance format? A short "Alternatives Considered" section would help reviewers understand the design space.

> 1. Defining a **user-facing API** (via Hudi Spark SQL integration) for vector search on Hudi tables.

Author: Yes I think this is a good idea to think about how we can have this logic be leveraged by other engines, for now I wanted to show a POC with Spark based on usage in the project.

> 1. Defining a **user-facing API** (via Hudi Spark SQL integration) for vector search on Hudi tables.

Reviewer 2: In that case, lets put Spark in the RFC name.. Meta point @yihua is probably getting at is - define a bounded scope

> 1. Defining a **user-facing API** (via Hudi Spark SQL integration) for vector search on Hudi tables.

Reviewer 2: @TheR1sing3un IIUC you are suggesting just defining the storage format for storing vectors vs implementing the search functionality? If so, can you clarify why. Unless all engines get some sort of standardized way to perform the search, the users cannot do anything useful unless we fully close the functionality IMO

2. Describing a **baseline implementation** for how we can achieve this in Spark–Hudi integration.

Note this RFC will also discuss at a high level **future enhancements** around a vector index to speed up this search. These details will likely be fleshed out in a future RFC around index creation and management.

## Background

> ### What is a Vector Embedding?

Reviewer 2: add some links for readers to read about this in detail? vs us explaining this here inline..

A **vector embedding** is a fixed-dimensional numeric representation (typically an array of `FLOAT`/`DOUBLE`) produced by a model to capture semantic properties of an object (text, image, audio, etc.). For example:

- An image encoder maps each image to a `d`-dimensional vector capturing visual semantics.
- A text encoder maps a sentence or document to a `d`-dimensional vector capturing its meaning.

In the context of how vector embeddings and their search would work in Hudi:

- RFC-100 enables storing unstructured payloads (e.g., image/video/audio/document BLOBs).

> - Embedding vectors are typically modeled as `ARRAY<FLOAT>` columns stored alongside those payloads in the same Hudi table, typically as another column within the table.

Reviewer: The RFC assumes embeddings are stored as `ARRAY<FLOAT>`. How would this handle tables where embeddings are stored in Lance format via RFC-100's column group support? Would the VectorSearchRelation need to read from different column group formats (Parquet vs. Lance) transparently, or is this initially limited to Parquet-stored arrays?

   | id | image      | label | `_distance` |
      |----|------------|-------|-------------|
   | 1  | `cat1.jpg` | cat   | 0.02        |
   | 2  | `cat2.jpg` | cat   | 0.03        |

6. The function returns these rows plus the `_distance` column.
7. The user materializes or joins these top-k similar images for downstream use (e.g., showing “similar images” in an application).

### User Experience

Requirements:

- Users should be able to perform this operation via DataFrames (used heavily in AI/ML) and SQL (used primarily for analytics).
- Expose clear, minimal parameters (table name or path, embedding column in the table, query embedding, which distance algorithm, top-k results).
- Return a table/DataFrame with an extra `_distance` (or `_score`) column that can be leveraged by the user for further data manipulation, such as filtering.

### Proposed Interface

We propose a Spark relation that can be used for both Spark DataFrames and Spark SQL.

```text
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     User-Facing APIs                       │
├──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────┤

> │   DataFrame Extension    │   SQL Table-Valued Function      │

Reviewer 2: +1

│                          │                                  │
│  df.vector_search(...)   │  SELECT * FROM                   │

> │                          │  hudi_vector_search(...)         │

Reviewer: The architecture diagram shows VectorSearchRelation reading directly from a Hudi table. How does this interact with Hudi's existing read path — specifically, does it go through HoodieFileIndex and respect time-travel queries, snapshot isolation, and incremental reads? Or is this a separate read path that bypasses Hudi's normal query planning?

└──────────────┬───────────┴────────────┬─────────────────────┘
               │                        │
               ▼                        ▼
        ┌────────────────────────────────────────┐
        │   VectorSearchRelation (Scala)         │
        │   - Core k-NN search logic             │
        │   - Filter pushdown                    │
        │   - Distance calculations              │
        │   - File format integration            │
        └────────────────┬───────────────────────┘
                         │
                         ▼
                ┌────────────────────┐
                │   Hudi Table       │
                │   (with vectors)   │
                └────────────────────┘

```

### Query Example

We wanted to follow similar semantics as what other modern data systems offer for performing vector search.
See the following reference material here:
* https://docs.databricks.com/aws/en/sql/language-manual/functions/vector_search
* https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/snowflake-cortex/vector-embeddings

An intial start for how a hudi vector interface would look would be something like this
```

> SELECT *

Reviewer 2: can I also pass fillters using `WHERE` and project specific columns out?

embedding_col   => 'image_embedding',
query_vector    => ARRAY(0.12F, -0.03F, 0.81F, ...),
k               => 10,
distance_metric => 'cosine'
)
);
```
Users can then chain other SQL operations on top of this such as performing filters and join on the results.

```
    // Vector search with WHERE clause filtering
      val result = spark.sql(
        s"""
           |SELECT id, name, price, category, _distance
           |FROM hudi_vector_search(
           |  '$tablePath',
           |  'embedding',
           |  ARRAY(1.0, 2.0, 3.0),
           |  10
           |)
           |WHERE category = 'electronics' AND price < 100
           |ORDER BY _distance
           |""".stripMargin
      ).collect()

```

```
  // Vector search with JOIN
      val result = spark.sql(
        s"""
           |SELECT vs.id, vs.name, c.category_name, vs._distance
           |FROM hudi_vector_search(
           |  '$productsPath',
           |  'embedding',
           |  ARRAY(1.5, 2.5),
           |  3
           |) vs
           |JOIN $categoriesTable c ON vs.category_id = c.category_id
           |ORDER BY vs._distance
           |""".stripMargin
      ).collect()

```

> For an intial POC of this RFC please see the following commit in a personal branch: https://github.com/rahil-c/hudi/commit/8a7e1343a347e8061e0e566563c847cfd4ea2f2c#diff-16b383ee6fd99ebc491f3e15185c585e4a7c0796fc3461b8439d28cfee046468

Reviewer 2: draft PR?

## Future Enhancements

> The next goal would be to integrate vector search into Hudi's indexing and metadata capabilities, similar to how Hudi already uses the metadata table and secondary indexes (e.g., Bloom, column stats) to accelerate queries.

Author: @vinothchandar discussed with vinoth, for now we will go with a spark TVF approach for the initial phase.

This RFC intentionally defers detailed index design to a dedicated vector-index RFC, but discusses some ideas at a high level.

> #### Vector Index Algorithms

Reviewer 2: what kind of latencies can one expect for a 10 TB scale table..
